Key Rotation Documentation (#2555)
wso2/docs-is: en/docs/administer/blue-green-data-encryption-keyrotation.md

# Blue-Green Data Encryption Key Rotation

This section contains the complete process you need to follow in order to perform symmetric data encryption key rotation on a WSO2 Identity Sever(5.11.0 and above).

> Key rotation can be defined as retiring an encryption key and replacing it with a new key. Data is encrypted using a key known as Data Encryption Key(DEK) and the DEK is then encrypted with another key called Key Encryption Key(KEK), this is known as envelope encryption. Frequent rotations of these encryption keys are considered as industry best practices by PCI DSS and NIST standards. 

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> ## Why should you rotate encryption keys?

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

*   A cryptoperiod is the time span during which a specific key is authorized for use. [NIST SP 800-57](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-57pt1r5.pdf) recommends different cryptoperiods for different encryption key types. 
    *   Symmetric Data Encryption Keys
        *   OUP recommended for large volumes of data is about a day or a week
        *   OUP recommended for smaller volumes of data is about 2 years
    *   Symmetric Key, Wrapping Keys
        *   OUP recommended for a key that wraps a large number of keys is about a day or a week
        *   OUP recommended for key that wraps smaller number of keys is upto 2 years
*   Security compliance requirements
*   Security breach requirements

> !!! note

Author: Sure, addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

    Originator Usage Period(OUP) is the time period during which encryption is applied to data

!!! note
    The above mentioned cryptoperiods can vary based on other factors like the sensitivity of data and the amount of data we have etc.

## Background

WSO2 Identity Server has the following key usages for signing/encrypting data and each of these types will have different key rotation requirements

1.  TLS Connection
2.  Signing and encryption of data (JWT assertions, payloads) shared with external parties (SP, IdP)
3.  Encryption of sensitive runtime level configuration secrets/user data persisted in datastores and userstores
4.  Encryption of sensitive deployment level configuration data in configuration files

> With WSO2 IS 5.11.0 onwards symmetric encryption mechanism is used to encrypt internal sensitive runtime data above. The DEK used to encrypt these data are configured in the `deployment.toml` file and it is protected by a KEK. Secure vault is being utilized as of now to protect this DEK. Here we will consider only the rotation of the Data Encryption Key configured in the `deployment.toml` file. 

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

## DEK rotation frequency

In the case of a security compliance requirement we can see that symmetric DEK rotation can be done in 2 years or less based on the volume of data we have.

> In a security breach scenario we must rotate the DEK immediately and re-encrypt all the data to the new DEK.

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

## Key Rotation Approach

> WSO2 IS has introduced an external tool that re-encrypts internal data after rotation of the configured symmetric data encryption key. Here mainly we have considered the re-encryption of the Identity and registry databases and some configuration files. Apart from that the tool will sync end user data that gets generated in the live system to the new setup.

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

The external java client that performs the above tasks can be created by following the steps [here](../../administer/blue-green-data-encryption-keyrotation/#how-to-create-the-key-rotation-tool).

## Tables that support re-encryption 

> At the moment below tables are supported for re-encryption

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> ??? info "Tables that support re-encryption"

Author: Sure, addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

    |------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
    | IDN_IDENTITY_USER_DATA                   | TOTP secretKey and verifiedSecretKey claims                                     |
    | IDN_OAUTH2_AUTHORIZATION_CODE            | OAuth2 authorization codes                                                      | 
    | IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN                  | OAuth2 access and refresh tokens                                                | 
    | IDN_OAUTH_CONSUMER_APPS                  | Consumer secrets                                                                | 
    | WF_BPS_PROFILE                           | BPS profile password                                                            | 
    | WF_REQUEST                               | WF request credentials                                                          |   
    | REG_PROPERTY                             | Keystore passwords, Keystore privatekeyPass and Entitlement subscriberPasswords | 

## Configuration files that support re-encryption

> At the moment below configuration files are supported for re-encryption

Reviewer: At the moment, the configuration files given below are supported for re-encryption.

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> ??? info "Configuration files that support re-encryption"

Reviewer: Shall we make it a normal info box?

Author: Sure, addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

    
    | **Configuration file**            | **Path**                                                          | **Property** |
    |-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
    | Event publishers                  | `/repository/deployment/server/eventpublishers` files             | Password     | 
    | Super tenant secondary userstores | `/repository/deployment/server/userstores/<userstore>` files      | Password     | 
    | Tenant secondary userstores       | `/repository/tenants/<tenant_id>/userstores/<userstore>` files    | Password     |      
    
## Tables that support syncing

> At the moment below tables are supported to be synced during key rotation from the old setup to the new setup. Any other data won’t be persisted in the new setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, the tables given below can be synced during key rotation from the old setup to the new setup. Any other data will not be persisted in the new setup.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> ??? info "Tables that support syncing"

Reviewer: Avoid the collapsible?

Author: Sure, addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

    | IDN_IDENTITY_USER_DATA        | Identity claims when the identity data store is enabled | Usually recommended to sync if identity management features are enabled in the system.                                                                                   |
    | IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN       | OAuth 2.0 tokens                                        | Need to sync if the tokens created during the key rotation period needs to be valid after key rotation.                                                                         |
    | IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN_SCOPE | OAuth 2.0 scopes                                        | If the IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN is synced, this table also needs to be synced.                                                                                            |
    | IDN_OAUTH2_AUTHORIZATION_CODE | OAuth 2.0 authorization codes                           | Need to sync if the authorization codes created during the key rotation period need to be valid after key rotation. |

!!! note

>     In this section, `<OLD_IS_HOME>` is the directory where the current Identity Server resides in, and `<NEW_IS_HOME>` is the directory where the copy of the current Identity Server resides in. `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>` refers to the location [here](https://github.com/wso2/identity-tools/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.keyrotation) and the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` refers to the location of the external tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this section, `<OLD_IS_HOME>` is the directory where the current Identity Server resides, and `<NEW_IS_HOME>` is the directory where the copy of the current Identity Server resides. `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>` refers to the location [here](https://github.com/wso2/identity-tools/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.keyrotation) and the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` refers to the location of the external tool
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

## How To Create The Key Rotation Tool

> 1.  Clone the repository [identity-tools](https://github.com/wso2/identity-tools)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Clone the repository, [identity-tools](https://github.com/wso2/identity-tools)
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> 2.  Built it using maven by running the command `mvn clean install`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Build it using maven by running the command `mvn clean install`
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

3.  Go to the `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/target` folder and copy the `keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar` jar file and the `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/target/lib` folder to `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location. Get the `properties.yaml` file, `keyrotation.sh` file and the `triggers` folder from `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/src/main/resources` and copy to the same `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location.
  
## Performing blue-green key rotation

1.  Block all privileged user flows and allow only end user flows.

    !!! note
        For the privileged user flows, block all admin services from the load balancer and the management console as well. For end user flows the above [tables](../../administer/blue-green-data-encryption-keyrotation/#tables-that-support-syncing) will be synced to the `<NEW_IS_HOME>`, so only these end user data flows should be allowed to generate in the `<OLD_IS_HOME>`.

2.  Execute the `old<identity-db-type>.sql` script in the `<OLD_IS_HOME>` identity database to create temp tables and triggers

    !!! note
        The triggers can be found inside `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>/triggers` folder.

> 3.  Create a copy of the `<OLD_IS_HOME>`(`<NEW_IS_HOME>`) and dump `<OLD_IS_HOME>` identity and registry databases and create the new databases

Reviewer: Having the old and new IS home mentions together is confusing. Can you please to try to make this step clearer?

`<OLD_IS_HOME>`(`<NEW_IS_HOME>`)

Author: Sure, addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

4.  Drop the temp tables and triggers in the `<NEW_IS_HOME>` identity database using the `new<identity-db-type>.sql` script

    !!! note

>         The triggers can be found inside `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>/triggers` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The triggers can be found inside the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>/triggers` folder.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

        newRegDBUrl: jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/regdb1?useSSL=false
        newRegUsername: root
        newRegPassword: cm9vdA==
        enableDBMigrator: true
        enableConfigMigrator: true
        enableSyncMigrator: true
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for H2 DB type URL"
            
        ```
        jdbc:h2:~/Desktop/IS/copy/wso2is-5.11.0-beta5-SNAPSHOT/repository/database/WSO2IDENTITY_DB
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for MySQL DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/idndb?useSSL=false
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for DB2 DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:db2://localhost:50000/idndb
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for PostgreSQL DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/idndb
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for MSSQL DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:sqlserver://localhost:1433;databaseName=idndb
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for Oracle DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:oracle:thin:@localhost:1521/ORCLCDB.LOCALDOMAIN
        ```

> 6.  Run the tool using `./keyrotation.sh keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar properties.yaml` command from  inside the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6.  Run the tool using `./keyrotation.sh keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar properties.yaml` command from  the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

7.  Edit the `<NEW_IS_HOME>` `deployment.toml` file having the new configured databases and the new key 

> 8.  Start the `<NEW_IS_HOME>` once existing DB and config file data re-encryption completes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8.  Start `<NEW_IS_HOME>` once existing DB and config file data re-encryption is done. 
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> 9.  When no new entries are being synced in the logs, route traffic to the `<NEW_IS_HOME>` and enable all load balancer API endpoints(privileged and end user flows)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9.  When no new entries are being synced in the logs, route traffic to `<NEW_IS_HOME>` and enable all load balancer API endpoints(privileged and end user flows)
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

!!! note

>     Do not stop the tool at once, let it sync any remaining data in the temp tables after routing the traffic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Do not stop the tool at once, let it sync any remaining data in the temp tables after routing the traffic.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

## Verifying the key rotation

> *   Check the log files to verify if re-encryption happened successfully for the 7 identity and registry database tables. Check below logs for successful/failed re-encryption counts of OAuth2 access and refresh tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Check the log files to verify if re-encryption happened successfully for the 7 identity and registry database tables. Check the logs given below for the successful/failed re-encryption counts of OAuth2 access and refresh tokens
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

    ```tab="DB log sample"
    Successfully updated OAuth2 access and refresh tokens data records in IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN: 897
    Failed OAuth2 access and refresh tokens data records in IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN: 0
    ```

!!! note

>     If the key rotation task is successful there should be 0 as the failed logs count for all the tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the key rotation task is successful, the failed logs count should be `0` as for all the tables.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

*   Check the log files to verify if re-encryption happened successfully for the 3 configuration files. Check below logs for successful/failed re-encryption counts of event publisher configuration files

    ```tab="Config file log sample"
    Updated event publisher configuration files: 8
    Failed event publisher configuration files: 0
    ```

!!! note
    If the key rotation task is successful there should be 0 as the failed logs count for all the configuration files

*   Check the log files to verify if transformation of the synced data happened successfully for the 4 tables. Check below logs for successful/failed transformation of `IDN_IDENTITY_USER_DATA` table

    ```tab="Synced log sample"
    Successfully transformed totp data records in IDN_IDENTITY_USER_DATA_TEMP: 2
    Transformation failed totp data records in IDN_IDENTITY_USER_DATA_TEMP: 0
    ```

!!! note

>     If the synced task is successful there should be 0 as the failed logs count for all the synced tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the synced task is successful, failed logs count should be `0` for all the synced tables.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> *   Check for any errors in the log files and carefully analyse through the logs, if the error can be ignored proceed with other steps otherwise check what has caused the error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Check for any errors in the log files and carefully analyze the logs if the error can be ignored and other steps can be proceeded with. Otherwise, check what has caused the error.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

## Recovering from any failure

> If the key rotation task stops midway, we have to follow the blue green key rotation user guide steps again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the key rotation task stops midway, follow the blue green key rotation user guide steps again.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808

> If there are errors logged in the log files carefully go through the errors and find what has caused the error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are errors logged in the log files, carefully go through the errors and find what has caused the error.
```

Author: Addressed with https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2555/commits/e4826286f4b66bb74b49890f19dce24148b95808
